while herbert yardley may be the best known cryptologist,uncontestably the greatest is 
william frederick friedman. unlike hiscontemporary, his eminence is due most emphatically to 
what he did.indeed, two more dissimilar men in a single field can scarcely beimagined. where 
yardley was rabelaisian, outgoing, superficial, free andeasy with the details of a good story, and 
ever ready for the main chance,friedman tended toward introversion, depth of study, personal 
security,timidity, dedication, and accuracy, nicety, and validity of work. despitethe 
relative drabness of these personal traits—or perhaps because ofthem, friedman's theoretical 
contributions and his practical attainmentsexceed those of any other cryptologist. 
yardley's career was like anamazing skyrocket that explodes in fantastic patterns against 
theheavens. friedman's was like the sun.he was born wolfe friedman on september 24, 1891, in 
kishinev,russia, the oldest son and second child of frederick and rosa friedman.his father, a 
rumanian who spoke eight languages and worked as aninterpreter for the russian post office, 
emigrated to america in 1892, at which time his son's name was changed to william. the family 
settledin pittsburgh, where his father managed a sewing machine agency.william graduated in 1909 
as one of the ten honor students in a class of300 at pittsburgh central high school; he 
then went to work as chiefclerk in the erie city iron works, a firm that sold steam engines. 
aboutthat time the back-to-the-farm movement called to city boys, and in thefall of 1910, 
friedman and three friends enrolled in michiganagricultural college, whose chief attraction 
was that it was tuition-free.but friedman soon discovered that farming held little 
interest for him.he was an inventive young fellow who liked to fix things and had writtensome 
science fiction for his high-school paper; he was rapidly coming tothe conclusion that he 
liked science. at the end of the term he learnedthat tuition was also free in a scientific 
field allied to agriculture—genetics—at one of the ivy league universities, cornell. he 
borrowedtrain fare and arrived in ithaca, new york, in february, 1911, where hegot a job waiting on 
tables. after commencement in february of 1914, heattended graduate school, managing to fall 
in love twice, once with abrunette, once with the blonde daughter of a movie-house owner. 
whilehe was there, a wealthy textile merchant, george fabyan, whomaintained laboratories in 
acoustics, chemistry, genetics, and cryp-tology (to try to prove that bacon wrote 
shakespeare's plays) on his 500-acre estate, riverbank, at geneva, illinois, decided that he 
needed ageneticist to improve the grains and livestock on his farm. he applied tocornell for 
a "would-be-er," not an "as-is-er," and hired friedman, tobegin june 1, 1915.fabyan was a man of no 
formal education but of intelligence andenergy. he had a great desire to be "somebody," and that 
desiremotivated his subsidizing the baconian studies: proof of thisrevolutionary thesis 
would cover its patron as well as its actualdiscoverers with glory. he himself read little, but 
he absorbed enoughfrom those around him to make his talk on almost any subject 
soundimpressive—at least superficially. he was autocratic, never allowing hisstaff to 
disagree with him, but otherwise not unpleasant so long asemployees recognized that he was 
boss. a cardinal article of faith withhim was that a well-executed sales campaign could put 
across almostanything.